I'm going to read you the words found in Paul's Epistle to the Romans in chapter 11, from verse 17 to verse 22, from verse 17 to verse 22, in the 11th chapter of Paul's Epistle to the Romans.
And if some of the branches be broken off from thou being a wild olive tree, where it graft in among them, and with them partigest of the root and fatness of the olive tree,
Burst not thyself against the branches.
But if thou burst, thou bearest not the root, but the root thee.
Thou wilt say, then, the branches were broken off, that I might be graphed in.
Well, because of unbelief, they were broken off, and thou standest by faith.
Be not high-minded, but fear.
For if God spared not the natural branches, take heedless, he also spare not thee.
Behold, therefore, the goodness and severity of God, on them which fail, severity, but toward the goodness, if thou continue in his goodness, otherwise thou also shalt be cut off.
Now, I want in particular to deal with the statement from verse 18 to the end of verse 22, but I read you again
the 17th verse in order to remind you of the context.
We've been looking for the last two Friday nights at verses 16 and 17.
And there we saw that the apostle was very concerned to put clearly to these Gentile believers, for most of these Roman Christians were Gentiles, not all, but the majority undoubtedly were Gentiles.
The apostle has written to them and is in this section in particular concerned to make clear to them the position of both Jew and Gentile in the Christian church.
That's the theme.
They are members of the church.
And he is dealing with this great and extraordinary phenomenon that the Jews who had been the people of God throughout the centuries
are in the main outside the Christian church, whereas the Gentiles, who had no knowledge of God, the only true God that was steeped in paganism and all that accompanies paganism, they had come into the church.
Now, that's the subject that he's dealing with as we've seen.
And here, in particular, the apostle is giving what is the clearest exposition, perhaps in the pearl of the New Testament itself, of this whole matter of
the Jew and the Gentile in the Christian church, their relationship to one another, and their relationship to the church.
Now, he's put that as we saw last week, especially in this picture of his about the olive tree.
The olive tree we defined as being the people of God, starting especially in a clear manner, in the clearest manner with Abraham, undoubtedly going back beyond that, even to include
able to generate and know and people like that, not to say even Adam and Eve.
However, the people of God, the thing is made particularly clear with the call of Abraham, and that is why Abraham is described so constantly in the Scripture as the father of the faithful, and that is why we as Christian, Gentile Christians, are described in Galatians 3 at the end as the children of Abraham.
because we are the children of faith very well.
Now, the apostle has stated in general that the church therefore consists of people who belong to this olive tree.
Originally, it was almost entirely confined to the Jews, but now he says a great change has taken place.
The Jewels, as a whole, are outside.
They've been cut off, cast away as it were.
and the Gentiles have been grafted in.
This wild olive tree representing the Gentiles, they've been grafted in to this body, this tree.
The people of God, whereas the old, original people of God are outside.
Now, that's the point at which we were right.
But now the epistle turns the side, as it were, for a moment.
in what we cannot but regard as a kind of, well, not so much a digression, as a turning aside in order to address an exhortation and a warning to the Gentiles.
He has explained their position to them, but now he is particularly anxious that they should be warned against a certain danger that confronted them.
And that is what we've got.
in verses 18 to 22.
Then again in verse 23, the apostle will return to the main line as it were, which is to expound yet further the position of the Jew in this olive tree which constitutes the children of God, the people of God.
Now, it's very interesting once more, and I can't refrain from indicating this and emphasizing it, that the greater apostle
was always first and foremost a pastor and a teacher.
Now, here, as we've already seen, and as we shall see yet more clearly, he is handling the profoundest doctrine conceivable.
But he never does it in a theoretical manner.
He never does it in an academic manner.
There's nothing so far removed from the apostle as the kind of drier, dust professor.
who are simply interested in truth, and more or less would go on speaking if there were nobody listening to him.
That's not the apostle Paul.
The apostle Paul is primarily a preacher, primarily a pastor, not a dryer's dust theologian ever.
He's concerned that these people should understand the truth, and he's equally concerned that they should apply it, that they should see the implications of the truth, and he takes no risks at all.
He applies it for them.
And he doesn't hesitate to interrupt a tremendous argument like this with this personal exhortation, warning and application of the truth.
Now, that's what we've got, I say, from verse 18 to the end of verse 22.
Now then, how do we deal with this little section, this subsection?
Well, I have divided it for your consideration and the four main headings.
First of all, of course, we've got to deal with actual exposition.
We've got to make clear and to have clear in our minds exactly what the Apostle is saying.
Secondly, we've got to extract from that the teaching of the Apostle.
In other words, it's never enough merely to give an alternative translation or to give a kind of paraphrase.
We start with it, but you don't stop at that.
You then say, what is thought here?
What are the principles enunciated?
What is the doctrine?
What is the truth?
that the apostle is anxious to convey, so that's our second main hitting.
And then, thirdly, in considering the teaching, we shall find ourselves confronted with a problem.
A problem is raised here, not by the apostle, but a problem of necessity will arise in other minds in this way.
How do we reconcile what he teaches here with what he has taught us elsewhere?
about the final perseverance of the saints and assurance of salvation.
So there's a problem implicit in the teaching, and we've got to look at that.
And then, broadly, I hope to be able to take the whole of this teaching, having dealt with our problem, and show its relevance and its application to the very situation that is confronting us as Christian people at the present time.
We are members of the Christian Church.
And there's great confusion in the world today with regard to the nature of the church as to what is the church.
And there is a popular teaching, what is commonly called ecumenical teaching, which seems to me to be suffering from a failure to understand the essential teaching of the apostle at this very point.
So we have to arrive at the fourth section in which we shall show
the general relevance of this particular teaching to our position at the present hour.
Very well.
Now, there's my analysis of the subsection.
Let's start then with exposition.
What's he talking about here?
Well, as is his custom, he states his theme straight away at the beginning.
At the beginning of verse 80, here's the point.
Both not against the branches.
Both not thyself, if you like.
against the branches.
Well, you see, this is where the context comes in.
The branches are the bulk of the Jewish nation that is now outside the Christian Church.
Well, they were, they've been the people of God.
They were, as he's already described them, the natural branches in this olive tree, but they've been plucked away
They've been broken up.
Some of the branches have been broken up.
And here, having described it like that, he said, now, don't you make the mistake of bursting against those branches?
He's addressing the Gentile crystals who have been grafted into the olive tree in the place of those natural branches, the jewels which have been torn out and thrown away for the time being.
Now, that's the point.
He realises that there is a danger, that the Gentiles who have been brought into the church in this unnatural manner, as we shall find he refers to it in verse 24, that you were graphed in, he says, contrary to nature.
There is a danger that they will misunderstand us.
What is the danger?
Well, the danger is the danger of pride.
Pride in their position
as Gentiles as members of the Christian Church.
And accompanying that pride in their own position is the complementary danger of despising the Jew.
That's the key.
Both not against the branches.
You Gentiles is as must not best in yourselves as over against the Jew.
You must not despise them.
Now, how did they do that?
How are they in danger of doing this?
Well, the first argument seems to be this, that they just take it for granted, that they are better than the Jew.
They say, here we are, we are in the church, we are the majority of the people in the church.
Well, therefore it's obvious that we are the best part of this and the church is ours.
Now, the apostle immediately answers that.
in the second part of the 18th verse.
Verse 18, A, if you like, the statement.
Don't do this.
Then 18b, the second half of the verse, he gives them the reasons for not doing so.
And the answer is this.
Don't do that, he says, because if thou burst, realize that you don't bear the root, but the root bears you,
He's reminding them, in other words, that they are not the tree.
But that they, from the outside, have been grafted into the tree, and as he's already reminded them, they are what they are because they have been enabled to partake of the root and fatness of the olive tree, the end of verse 17.
That's his old case.
We needn't go over that again.
That is what makes us Christian.
that we are put into Christ as it were, put into the church into Christ, and we receive this life that is in Him, this life of God in the soul, the root and fatness of the olive tree.
So His immediately reply to them is this.
He says, you've got no grounds for bursting at all.
He says, because you don't bear the roots.
You don't carry the roots as it were.
You are not responsible for the life of the roots.
but the life of the roots is responsible for you.
Now, he is concerned in particular in that statement with the whole position of course of the Jews.
And it's not just another way of telling them this.
Now, he said, don't you, Gentile, lose your heads and begin to burst and think that you are some remarkable and extraordinary people because you're members of the Christian judge.
Let me remind you, he says that
before you ever came into the Christian church, there were others there before you, and those who were there before them, of course, were the Jew.
The apostle has reminded us at the beginning of the chapter, I, myself, also, am an Israelite.
The first believers, the first Christians, were, after all, Jew.
And he's reminding the Gentiles that they owe all the blessings that they're enjoying, ultimately, in a sense, to the Jew.
Now, you remember our Lord Himself.
He put this in a striking statement which he made to the woman of Samaria.
There was an old feud between the Jews and the Samaritans, and our Lord is talking to this woman of Samaria.
She had turned to him and said, our fathers worshiped in this mountain, and you say that in Jerusalem is the place where men ought to worship.
Jesus said unto her, woman, believe me, the hour cometh,
When he shall neither in this mountain nor yet at Jerusalem worship the Father.
You worship you know not what.
We know what we worship for salvation is of the Jew.
I've been reading to you verses 20 to 22 in the fourth chapter of John's Gospel.
Salvation is of the Jew.
Now, we all ought to be clear about this.
The New Testament in a sense comes out of the Old Testament.
or look at it in the way we were considering it last Friday night in terms of the olive tree.
After all, what happens to us as Gentiles is, that we are brought into these covenants that God made with the Jews, with Abraham their father, and reaffirmed them and reiterated them throughout the centuries to the Jew.
So that he says, look here, don't you Gentiles begin to burst?
You haven't started this process.
You were not the originators of this.
You've been brought into it.
You don't carry the root, but the root carries you.
And thus he renines them at once that they have no reason whatsoever for bursting of themselves and despising the Jew.
They are a great debt to the Jew, and they must never forget it, and we must never forget it.
A way in which you can look at this if you like is this, and it shows you
How the early church was guided by the Holy Spirit?
Has it ever occurred to you why that church, which was mainly Gentile, should ever have kept its hold upon the Old Testament?
There was obviously a temptation to them.
That's what the Apostle is dealing with, to say, well, of course, all that's happened until now doesn't matter at all.
the Jews have gone wrong, there's nothing there, nobody we don't need, they're all testament, they're literature, they're books and so on, and not of no interest to us at all.
Now they were saved from that, and they were partly saved from that by the kind of teaching that the Apostle gives at this point.
Salvation doesn't start in the New Testament.
As I showed you last Friday night, this is but a continuance of something God has been doing right from the beginning.
With Abraham and the Patriots and the Fathers, we are just brought into this.
We don't bear the roots.
The roots bear us.
Very well, there is his first answer.
But then having dealt with that, he puts up a second false argument to which the Gentiles are present, and he puts it like this in the 19th verse.
Very well, he says,
If I say that to you, you will now say to me, that will say them, oh yes, that's all right, but wait a minute.
After all, those branches were broken up, that I might be grafted in.
You haven't answered the question, says this objector.
All right, I'll accept in general, if you like, that
I am an average child of Abraham, and that all I am and all I have is to be traced to the fact that I've been grafted into this olive tree, but after all, it is simply a fact that the Jews, as a bulk and as a nation, have been taken out.
They've been extracted as it were.
They've been broken off.
And we, Gentiles, have been put in in their place.
Well, it says this gentile objector.
There must be some reason for this.
While they take note and I put him in step, isn't it obvious?
We must be superior, we must be better.
There's no other explanation of it.
If they've been taken out that we may be taken in, obviously they're inferior to us or we are superior to them.
It's inevitable.
That's the second false argument that is put forward by the gentiles who are tending to misunderstand this whole doctrine.
Now then, this is a very serious matter.
So serious that the apostle deals with it in his customary exhaustive manner.
He's taking no risks at all about this point.
He wants them to see how any such thinking on the part of the Gentiles is rarely a betrayal of the fact that they haven't hardly understood the whole question of the way of salvation.
So how does he deal with it?
He deals with it like this.
First of all, he gives them a direct answer.
This is the first part of the 20th verse.
What is method?
I will say then, the branches were broken after that I might be graphed in.
Well, this is the apostle.
All right.
Because I don't believe they were broken up, and I will stand this by faith.
What is this direct answer?
In verse 20a, the first part of verse 20, the answer is this.
All right, is the a puzzle?
I, of course, accept your fact.
The fact is that the Jews as a nation and as a people are no longer in the olive tree.
They're not in the church.
They're outside.
That's what he's been saying at great length from the beginning of chapter 9.
The effect, he says, is perfectly right.
But
The deduction that you've drawn from the fence is altogether and entirely wrong.
Of course, he says that Jews have been broken off, but they have not been broken off for the reason that you were assuming.
Very well.
What is this?
Well, what he's saying is this.
He says, if you think that the Jews have been broken off and that you Gentiles have been put in,
Because Gentiles are inherently superior to the Jews, well, then he says, you are fallen into precisely the same era as the Jews themselves have fallen into.
And you've completely misunderstood the way of salvation.
How?
Well, like this, salvation is never a matter of nationality or of merit.
That's the first statement, the first argument.
By saying, we are in because we are superior, you're falling back on nationality.
You are saying Gentiles are better than Jews.
Yes, but you see, says the apostle, that's the very mistake of the Jews.
They thought they were the people of God.
They were superior to everybody.
They learned where to be safe, simply because they were Jews.
You're repeating their own error.
And the error is to think that what decides whether you're a saved person, a Christian or not,
Is your nationality?
The moment you begin to think that, you're already wrong.
If you think you're saved by your nationality or by your own inherent goodness or any merit that belongs to you, you are denying the whole of the Christian teaching with regard to salvation.
Why?
Well, because as he puts it, well, because of unbelief.
They were broken up.
And thou standest by faith.
You see, the thing that determines and controls salvation is not nationality or upbringing or inherent goodness or anything you've done.
It's one thing only.
Faith, belief, what matters in this realm is one thing only.
Is it unbelief or faith?
Which is it?
You're one or the other.
You're either an unbeliever or you're a believer.
That is the only thing that matters.
The Jews, he said, well, cast off because of unbelief, not because they're Jews, not because they're some inherent weakness in being a Jew.
No, no, the Jews are cast offs, surely because of their unbelief.
Why are you gentiles in?
Not because you're a wonderful people, simply because you've exercised faith.
Nothing else at all.
Now, this is just exposition.
Now, in that connection, I must take up this word, stand it.
Well, because of unbelief, they were broken off and thou, stand this by faith.
This is a word we've found the apostle using before at the beginning of chapter 5 in the second verse.
He says that in chapter 5, therefore, being justified by faith, we are peace with God
Through our Lord Jesus Christ, now listen, thy womb also, we have access thy faith into this grace wherein we stand.
Some of you may remember when we were dealing with that.
I'd rather remember that I gave a whole evening to that, this standing of the Christian.
That the Christian is a man who is unable to stand in the presence of God.
Now, what do you mean by this standing?
Well, it's the same idea as the psalmist puts before us in the first psalm.
Blessed is the men that walketh not in the council of the ungodly, nor standeth in the way of sinners, nor siteth in the seat of the scornful, but his delight is in the law of the lord and in his lord hath he meditated day and night.
And he shall be like a tree planted by the rivers of water that bringeth forth his fruit in his season.
His leaf also shall not wither, and whatsoever he doeth shall prosper.
Listen, but the ungodly are not so.
But are like the chaff, which the wind drive us away, therefore.
The ungodly shall not stand in the judgment.
That's it.
They shall not stand, nor sinners, in the congregation of the righteous, far from standing.
They are like the chaff, that the wind drive us and blow us away.
This is a tremendous notion that we must never lose sight of.
A Christian is not a man of groves as it were.
A Christian is not a man who is lounging.
Once a man realizes the way of salvation, he stands.
Being justified by faith, we have peace with God.
He's great affirmation.
There is therefore now no condemnation to them that are in Christ Jesus.
That's enough for a mission.
The Christian is a man who stands.
He isn't uncertain.
He isn't hesitant.
He's not as if we're half in and half out, wondering whether he's saved us.
He stands.
We are meant to stand.
And says the apostle, you stand by faith.
And for no other reason whatsoever, you can't stand in the presence of God simply because you're a gentile.
You can't stand in the presence of God simply because you're a good moral person.
It's impossible.
Nobody can stand in the presence of God in his own inherent righteousness.
There is none righteous, no not one.
All have sinned and come short of the glory of God.
The whole world lieeth guilty.
That's it.
Lieeth guilty before God.
But in Christ, you stand.
You don't lie.
You stand.
And so you see, he brings in this wonderful word again.
And I couldn't pass it without emphasizing it and repeating it in this way, in order that you may see that once a man understands this way of salvation, he stands.
He goes with boldness and confidence into the presence of God.
We have this access, he says.
into this grace wherein we stand, or to use the language of Hebrews 1019.
We have boldness to enter into the earliest of all, by the blood of Jesus.
And when the great day of judgment comes, we say, with Count Zinson's office translated by John Wesley, oh, shall I stand in thy great day?
For who ought to make charge
Shall lay, fully absorbed by the island.
That's it.
I shall stand.
Or with toply the terrors of Lord of God with me can have nothing to do.
My saviors, obedience, and blood hide all my transgressions from thee.
Very well, says the apostle.
Realize that you stand as you do, solely by faith and by nothing else.
Very well, there is his direct answer to this auspicious and foolish and arrogant argument of the Gentiles that they have been grafted in because the Jews being unworthy were cut out.
All a matter of their superiority gives a direct answer.
He says, you're denying the whole principle of justification by faith only.
You are showing an elementary ignorance of the whole way of salvation.
But he doesn't leave them at that.
He starts with it, and that is the way to start.
You start by correcting false doctrine.
You enunciate the true doctrine.
But if you've got a pastor's heart like this manhead, and if you're a preacher as he was, you don't just say a thing like that, you
You drive it home, so he proceeds at once in the last part of this twentieth verse to wish you a warning.
Be not high-minded, but fear.
Now he is reprimanding.
They deserve it.
The arrogance of anybody claiming that he is in the Christian Church because of what he is and who he is.
This is not only wrong, it's something worse.
terribly dangerous, so he issues a shop reprimand being a high-minded, but here.
Now, this is always the greatest danger, the danger of being high-minded, the danger of having the wrong view of ourselves, the danger of overestimating ourselves, the danger of thinking that we are better than we are.
And the only antidote to that he tells them is fear.
And he repeats that later by saying, take heed, in verse 21, if God spared not the natural branches, take heed, lest he also spare not thee.
So you see, having put them right with his direct answer on the pure matter of doctrine, he issues this terrific wall.
Beware of being high-minded.
This is a great theme running right through the whole of the Bible.
I hope to, when I come to the teaching, the exposition of the teaching to explain it in greater detail to you.
I'm just explaining the passage for the moment.
So the third thing he does, having now put them right from this question of justification by faith and faith, and then having driven it on with the warning and the reprimand
He then produces an unanswerable argument, which is going to put this matter right once and forever, in verse 21.
And here it is.
If God is scared not the natural branches, take heed, lest he also scare not thee.
Why do I say that this is unanswerable?
Well, I'll go further.
I'll say that at this point the apostle simply demolishes
this foolish case put up by the Gentiles in their ignorance.
He demolishes it completely.
How does he do so?
Well, he again takes up what is obviously his favorite formula.
We've seen him doing it so after.
If the formula which says, if this, then that.
This is sure logic, of course.
And the apostle was a master at logic.
This be true very well then, this follows, take heed.
What is this?
Well, this is the argument again from the greater to the lesser.
Or we found him doing this almost endlessly.
One of my favorite illustrations of his doing this is Romans 5-10.
For if, when we were enemies, we were reconciled to God by the death of his son,
How much more or much more being reconciled?
We shall be saved by his life.
If God has done the greatest thing, he can't fail to do the lesser thing.
It's the same kind of argument here.
Well, what is this greater thing and what is this lesser thing to which I am referring?
Well, it's this.
And there is no answer to this.
If God spared not the natural branches,
If in other words, God has taken out of this olive tree, the Jew, who were the natural branches, who were his own people, the people that he had created himself, for himself, for his own peculiar possession, if God has dealt with them because of their arrogant pride in their nationality,
by taking them out of the olive tree and casting them aside, if he's done that with them of old people?
Well, to put it at its very lowest, it shouldn't surprise us if he does that with people who've been brought in in an unnatural manner and were not his own original people.
That's the argument.
Let me put it you like this.
Charles Hodge, I think,
deals with this in a most excellent manner.
It's an argument, if you like, in this way.
Imagine a man who had got a son, and of course, he looked to this son to carry on his business, his affairs, and his tradition, and he lavished his love upon him, and he blessed him, and he did everything he could for his good pleasure and for his well-being.
But unfortunately, this son turns out to be a poor character.
Misbehaves himself, insults his father, does everything contrary to his father's will.
And the father can see the whole of his purpose going astray.
And he feels this to such an extent that he puts his son on one side.
And he takes, if you like, a servant or somebody whom he knows, or somebody else's son with whom he's acquainted,
and he adopts these other men and puts him into the position of his son.
Now, this is the apostle's argument.
He says, if this man is such a man and such a righteous man and has got such a view of his own purpose, that he even puts his own natural son on one side, you be very careful as the adopted son.
If he will put his naturals on one side because of his ill behavior, how much more so is he likely to do it with you?
Now that's the argument, and it's the most powerful argument.
It is an unanswerable argument.
He here demolishes the case of the Gentiles once and forever.
Look here, says Paul.
it was because of their arrogant pride in themselves that God has put aside the Jews, the people whom he prepared for himself, if he's done that with them, how much more so?
Will he do that with people like you, Gentiles, who come in from the outside and have been grafted in this as it were unnatural men.
Now, that is the argument I say from the greater to the lesser.
It is the argument
from what God has already done to what he will inevitably do with others who are in a life situation in position.
And because of the fact, and because it is the greatest, the greatest of all, it is, I say, something that completely demolishes this wrong and false argument which has been put forward here by this Gentile objector.
Well, there is the third way in which he deals with this position.
And then, fourthly, in verse 22, he goes on to draw a great deduction from all this with regard to the character of God and God's ways with respect to men.
Now, here it is.
Behold, therefore, the goodness and severity of God on them which fell, severity.
But toward the goodness, if thou continuing his goodness, otherwise thou also shalt be cut and cut off.
Now, here is, of course, a great general statement.
And as I say, it is a kind of deduction.
That's why he starts by saying, behold, therefore, in the light of what God has actually done, this is the only conclusion to which we can come.
In other words, he lifts up the whole argument to this position.
Men become bestful and proud and despise others in the Kingdom of God for one reason only.
And that is that they fail to realize the truth about God himself.
That's what it all ultimately comes to.
This is the root cause of nearly all our troubles.
I want to show you this in greater detail when we come to the teaching.
I'm simply explaining his statement to you this evening.
Here it is, he says, how has it become possible?
How is it conceivable that anybody should burst in the presence of God, whether Jew or Gentile?
There's only one answer.
that they have failed to understand the truth about God, about his nature, about his character, about his attributes.
And often he says, nothing is more important than that you should be clear about this.
God has revealed the truth concerning himself.
And for this particular object we are dealing with here, he has revealed not only his goodness, but also his severity.
and men and women get into trouble, always, because instead of teaching the revelation of the character of God in these ways with respect to men, as we have it revealed in the Bible, they substitute their own ideas for that, or they take a part of the teaching of the Bible and they reject the remainder.
Now, it will be my object when we come to the teaching.
the doctrine involved in this statement to work that out with you in detail.
But you can think immediately for yourselves, oh, this is so applicable at this present time.
We are living in an age when the people even justify the fact that they never attend the place of worship at all on the grounds that God is love.
They justify immorality in the same way, God is love.
There's no such thing as the wrath of God.
There is no justice.
There is no severity.
That's the very thing that is happening at the present time.
Men and women who believe in God, so they say they don't believe in God as he's revealed himself.
They've got partial notions.
They pick and choose.
They accept what they like.
They reject what they don't like.
In other words, they don't worship God at all.
They worship an image which they themselves have erected.
and there are others of course, who go still further, who instead of taking the biblical revelation in any sense, discard it completely.
And in terms of philosophy and so on, construct a God after their own image and say that this is God.
And obviously therefore, they are wrong in the whole of their thinking and become wrong, likewise in their behavior and in their conduct.
Well now, there is the exposition
of what the Apostle says about this whole mapper.
I'm afraid we've got to leave it at that.
We haven't the time even to begin with the teaching that is involved in all this.
We've simply dealt with my first big section.
Get this fact clearly into your mind as to what the Apostle is saying here.
He is dealing with people.
who say, we are Christians because of something that is inherently true about us.
That's the thing that he's dealing with, the Gentiles, like the Jews before them, imagining that they were in simply because they're such good people, because they're superior to others and so on and so forth.
That's the thing he's dealing with.
He's dealing with people who think they're Christians because they've been born in Great Britain and not in India.
He's dealing with people who think that they're Christians because they were Christians or baptized, it doesn't matter which.
He's dealing with people who think they're Christians because of the good life they've lived or because of their excellent natural moral characters.
He's dealing with people who are boasting about anything at all.
That's what he's dealing with.
And you notice what he says.
He says, this is all due to the fact
that you have misunderstood that salvation is by faith alone.
This basic principle, it's a denial of that.
And still more, it is a failure to realize the truth about God, that the only thing that matters is our relationship to God, and that that is always a matter of faith.
Very well.
God willing, we'll proceed with our discussion of the teaching next Friday evening.
Let us pray.
Oh Lord, God, we pray thee to look down upon us with mercy and with compassion.
We have been considering this statement concerning the first Gentiles who came into the Christian church and we see so much of the same thing by nature in ourselves.
Oh God, we acknowledge
more than ever that we see clearly that we are saved by grace through faith, and that not of ourselves it is the gift of God.
O Lord, open our understandings, we pray the enablers especially to heed the warning of thy word, be not high-minded but fear.
O Lord, by thy spirit apply this great truth to us one by one.
that it may save us from grievous error, and all that follows from such error.
Keep us, we pray, as little children, keep us to that simplicity, which is in Christ Jesus.
And now, may the grace of the Lord Jesus Christ and the love of God and the fellowship and the communion of the Holy Spirit abide and continue with us.
Now, this night,
The words that remain under this are short and certain earthly life and pilgrimage and evermore.
Amen.